I mean, a particular kind of
conservative will look at something like
the British monarchy and say there's a
kind of mystique to this this system and
the traditions involved. Democracy is
way cooler than that. Democracy is way
weirder and more mysterious and more
more mystical. You know, this the idea
of people coming together, you know, if
we all do this ritual of elections and
so that's that's way cooler on like an
aesthetic level to me.
[Music]
Is the United States a democracy?
Was it ever? Can the cause of democracy
revive the Democratic Party? And would
more democracy make America more
progressive or more right-wing?
My guest today is a thinker trying to
chart a course for the American left
through the age of populism and Donald
Trump. He's the author of a provocative
new book, The Right of the People, which
makes the case for a new American
founding. Oito Wanvu, welcome to
Interesting Times.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> You're very welcome. Thanks for being
here. So, we're going to talk in this
conversation about how radical ideas and
radical critiques from the left might
end up being very influential in
Democratic party politics going forward.
But before we get there, I want to go
back to the last election uh which
Donald Trump won after a series of
campaigns in which the Democrats had
basically presented themselves as
defenders of our democracy against the
threat of authoritarianism,
fascism, or at the very least a
dangerous kind of populism. And what you
saw in 2024 was the failure of that
argument because in the end Donald Trump
didn't just win the electoral college,
he won the popular vote. Our democracy
as it exists today voted for him. So I
thought to start, could you talk a
little bit about that democratic message
and why from your perspective it failed?
>> Sure thing. So I think many voters went
to the polls in November understanding
the election as being a referendum on
democracy in precisely that way. I think
the people thought that they were being
asked to judge on one hand a set of
abstract ideals that their civics
teacher might have told them was
important in high school or grade school
and the price of groceries, the cost of
living. Um and I think a lot of
Americans, you know, looked at that
choice and they said, "Well, hell, I'm
going to go with my own economic
wellbeing." the hope, which I think was
a misguided hope, that Donald Trump was
going to improve conditions within the
economy. And so the abstractions the
Democrats ran on, the conception of
democracy that they put forward wasn't
compelling for a lot of different
reasons. I think early last year,
Gallup, I think, uh, did a poll where
they found more than 70% of Americans
didn't believe that democratic
institutions were functioning properly.
Right? So when Democrats came out and
said, "Our democracy needs to be
protected and saved," I think a lot of
Americans doubted whether they had a
functional democracy to begin with. And
so they've invested the their hopes in
Donald Trump partially because they
believe that he could be somebody who
would unstick the institutions, tear
them down, reformulate them in some kind
of way. Um, and so I think that this
this election can be read both as an
indictment of the particular way
Democrats talked about democracy in
their pitch to American voters and also
as a culmination of I think basic
anti-democratic deficits within the
Constitution uh that have empowered
Donald Trump and brought him to the
White House yet again. Well, and I think
just in just in your description, I
think you can see sort of the two two
potential takeaways, right? That people
sort of trying to reformulate ideas for
the Democratic party could draw from the
election and where you started with the
idea that voters were asked to choose
between abstractions and kitchen table
issues. Right? Out of that sense, you
get the argument that basically what the
Democratic party needs to do is just
focus on those kitchen table issues,
have policy debates, argue about
specific issues, healthcare, education,
the environment, and so on, and not get
caught up in larger theories of how
democracy works. But you do have a
larger theory of how democracy, well,
how it doesn't work, you think, in
America right now, and and how it should
work. So give me your definition of
democracy. What is a democracy?
>> A democracy is a system in which the
governed govern. You can read a lot of
political theory. You can read the
classics. Um I don't think you get a
definition that is more succinct than
that. Another formulation is Lincoln's
government of by and for the people. And
so in a democracy the people themselves
are the people who govern. It's not
entrusted as responsibility to some
alien authority, some external power,
some other hierarchy. um people take
upon the responsibility and burden and
and promise of governing themselves.
That's the core idea.
>> So how do you know that America in 2025
is not by the people and for the people
that the governed are not actually
governing?
>> So I think there are three
characteristics of any democratic
system. The first is political equality.
People are equal in standing when they
come to make a collective choice. So
when it comes to the Senate for
instance, uh we have one of the most
malortioned upper houses in the world. I
think only Argentina and Brazil among
our peers are more malortioned than
ours. The second characteristic is
responsiveness. There's real authority
amongst the public. When they come
together to make it collective choice,
things happen. And the last thing I
would say is majority rule. But as I
write, I think in very very basic ways,
our system flouts all three of these
things. So over the course of talking
about this book now I've done a lot of
events in Washington DC that is a city
of about 700,000 people in this country
without full representation in Congress.
Elanor Holmes Norton the one delegate
they have cannot cast a vote in the
final passage of legislation in the
house. There are 4 million Americans for
whom that is true. Most of them live in
Puerto Rico. Uh they are governed by the
federal government without a full equal
say in governance.
uh that I think by any reasonable
definition is not a democratic
arrangement. It's something that's
troubled people for many years in this
country. But even beyond that extreme,
those of us who do have representation
have very unequally aortioned
representation. Classic example,
California state of about 40 million
people uh for with its own country be
one of the 40 largest countries in the
world is one of the largest economies in
the world. has the same number of
senators as Wyoming, state of fewer than
600,000 people, fewer in fact than
Washington DC. That means functionally
that people in Wyoming have about 60 or
more than 60 times representation of
people at California do in the Senate. I
don't think that's a merely academic
point. You hear in school that this is
balanced out by the House. It's not
really in a substantive way. The Senate
alone shapes the judiciary. It shapes
the executive branch. Um and obviously
it's a veto point for the passage of
even ordinary legislation. Um so right
away you know and I think the Senate is
a crux of a lot of this. We have a
fundamental piece of our system that
flouts basic uh democratic principles
basic democratic intuitions. Again more
so by international comparison than some
of our peers. No country gets it
perfect. There's no ideal democracy out
there in the world. But I think it's
fair to say that a system is not really
democratic as much as it might purport
to be one. And what about what about the
economic component? How is a vision of
economic equality in your view essential
to having a functional democracy or
having a democracy that is actually
democratic?
>> Yeah. Well, this is one of the central
provocations of the book and I think the
kind of background intuition that people
have in mind even if they don't sort of
know it consciously about democracy is
that we are entitled to an amount of say
a basic level of say over the conditions
that shape our lives. Right. Um we're
not mere victims of circumstance
helplessly thrown about by the universe.
We're not uh the peons of particular
hierarchies of people who are more
powerful us than us or more privileged
than us. That's a basic democratic
intuition. Um and I think you know one
of the things that have gone around
progressive circles over the last decade
or so is you have people like Elizabeth
Anderson for instance who make the point
that we are governed in more spaces than
just the political sphere. uh we spend
about a third of our time at work. The
decisions that are made at the top of
corporations we work for often affect us
more directly, intimately, and
immediately than decisions made in
Washington DC or in our state houses or
city hall. And yet we feel that we're
not democratically entitled to any kind
of voice in those spaces except for
maybe hoping that we can act through
government to regulate the economy. Um,
when we try to do that, we find that
Washington DC and our political
institutions are often dominated by
wealthy people, our bosses. Um, and I
think that when it comes to solving the
concrete problems of inequality,
um, worker power, the absence of worker
power, the absence of worker voice is
one of the things that's contributed to
our current economic situation. That is
a democratic problem. Um, and I think it
sort of suggests suggests democratic
solutions as well.
>> All right, let's let's do an excursion
then back in time.
>> Yeah.
>> To the American founding because one of
your arguments, right, is that America
was not actually intended to be a
democracy, right?
>> That in fact we should understand our
founding
>> almost in terms of a kind of oligarchic
coup.
>> So talk a little bit about your view of
the founding.
>> Right. So, I mean, you know, when you
raise some of the objections that I've
raised about the nature of our system,
conservatives will often say, "Well, you
know, we're a republic, not a
democracy." I think liberals by habit
say, "No, no, no, that's not true. The
founders actually intended democracy,
but they messed up in 50 million
different ways." Um, I think the
conservatives have the better side of
the argument when you actually look at
the historical record. Um, and I think
that people people should understand
that the constitution is forged in a
particular political and economic
context. At the end of the American
Revolution, uh we're in a state of true
economic crisis. A lot of reasons for
this. Land is destroyed and ravaged.
Slaves escape. Trade restrictions are
imposed by the British. Poor farmers,
especially people in the back country
across the nation are appealing uh for
debt relief and for tax relief. They're
asking if they can pay their taxes and
their debts in kind with goods. Um
they're asking for different measures of
economic uh assistance. And one of the
main things they're asking for actually
is the circulation of paper money.
There's a shortage of hard currency in
the country. They believe that the
circulation of paper money will make it
easier for them to pay down their their
obligations. This deeply deeply troubles
the wealthiest people in America. Um
there's a belief that this undermines
the stability of contracts that it
frustrates or uh complicates the
creditworthiness of the country. Um and
there's just this belief too that people
are in economic distress because they
hadn't been frugal enough. They were
spending on gambling and drinking on
luxuries imported from Europe. There's a
lot of
>> My understanding is that they were in
fact spending on drinking.
>> Well, yes to a substantial degree.
>> To a substantial degree. Is that is that
the source of economic distress across
the country? Probably not. But there's a
lot of colorful writing that Woody
Holton goes through in Unruly Americans
if people want another read on this. Um,
and so people are successfully appealing
to state governments for this relief
with the exception of a state like
Massachusetts, very conservative in its
design with the state constitution. It
resists these appeals. In fact, it
increases taxes. Um, and you have this
uprising, which people may have heard
about in school, Sha's rebellion, this
this armed uprising um that is
eventually put down and it alarms the
founders significantly. There have been
abortive attempts to rework the articles
and to reform government before then. Um
but they come to understand that the
state government has gotten under
control. They were actually directing
the economic uh situation in the country
and something needed to be done. They
needed a stronger sovereign federal
government that could act directly upon
people that could request taxes and
revenue directly from people. um and
that would actually be less accessible
democratically than the prevailing order
had been. Um and they come to uh
Philadelphia in 1787 with that
understanding. And this is not a matter
of speculation. We have one of the very
first speeches made at the conventions
made by Edmund Randolph of Virginia
where he says look the thing that
actually brought us together here is the
excess excess of democracy at the state
uh constitutional level. We have
pamphlets and obviously the federalist
papers. We we have a real body of
information um that informs us as to
what they were thinking when they
designed some of these institutions. And
um you know it's not history that I
think most Americans are familiar with
or are encouraged to think about. But it
matters. It matters in getting us to
understand why the institutions we have
function the way that they do. Um but I
also think it gives us a kind of
permission. This was not some kind of
sacred compromise that came down uh a
mountain on on tablets like this was a
particular contingent agreement. Um and
we should consider ourselves empowered
with all we know now about governance
with the values we have now to make
dramatic changes to the political system
uh with just as much right as the
founders did.
>> Right? But it is also in a way an
invitation that Americans have have been
taking accepting right uh since barely
after the ink was dry on the
constitution. Uh because I think there's
another narrative which says a number of
influential founders for different
reasons envisioned a more aristocratic
form of republican government than what
we've ended up with. Um but some of that
just sort of evaporated at the start.
Right? founders did not anticipate
political parties. Founders imagined a
version of the of the electoral college
or at least some did where literally the
electors would be, you know, wise men
deliberating to, right? And that that
collapses very quickly and then you just
have a sequence across the 19th and 20th
century where the country, you know,
steadily becomes more responsive to uh
to democratic majorities. And this
starts with Andrew Jackson, which who is
currently a figure in great disrepute on
the left, but democratizes the system in
a way that that once led to him being
celebrated right there, you know, in the
in the old days of the, you know, the
Jefferson Jackson dinners that the
Democratic that the Democratic party
used to have and and all of the
narratives around New Deal liberalism
celebrate Jackson as a democratizer, but
you have the expansion of the franchise
over time to women, to freed slaves,
African-Americans, and so on, right? And
so you have by the time you reach the
civil rights era and the middle of the
20th century, right, you have a
landscape where that founding
constitution, you have the direct
election of senators. So America
becomes, you would agree, right? Much
more democratic.
>> Of course, I would I wouldn't dispute
that at all. We we're we're living in a
much more democratic society today in
all kinds of ways than we were in 1787.
I wouldn't dispute that. I think the the
case I'm making though is that the
central institutions
um that the founders set up in 1787 um
in many ways survive today. Yes, we have
the direct election of senators that is
true but we have equal aortionment still
which is one of the central compromises
they made at the convention um for all
they might have distrusted disliked
democracy. Madison and Hamilton both
thought that the principle of equal
aortment went too far in advantaging uh
the small states. They say this at the
convention. They say this in the
federalist papers. The small states are
going to not walk out. In fact, Gunning
Bedford of Delaware says during the
convention,
>> keep Rhode Island happy.
>> We got to got to keep them happy. But,
you know, Gunning Bedford, I think,
makes a speech at convention where he
says basically, look, we will succeed.
We will join some other foreign power if
we don't get a pres preservation of
equal aortionment which we'd had under
the articles of confederation um in the
new system. Right? So that feature which
Madison warns about I think quite uh
cogently at the convention continues to
be perverse and continues to generate
perverse outcomes for us to this day. Uh
people have talked about the Senate in
this respect especially if population
trends continue you know small and small
proportion of the country will win a
greater and greater proportion of the
seats. This is going to continue to
distort governance and actually the
distortions are going to worsen. a
presidency that we've seen in the last
six months especially I think validates
some of the concern people had at the
founding about whether they're creating
some kind of monarchical or quasi
monarchical uh executive. Um and so I
think that you know for all we've done
to expand the right to vote democratize
the system include the public in in more
and more places I think all of that is
is real but I think it's time for us to
really consider all of these things. I
think it's time for us to consider, you
know, the extent that people are angry
about Donald Trump. Again, what are the
elements of the system that allowed
Donald Trump to rise as a political
figure and that have sustained them? I
think there to uh to an ironic extent
some of the elements that the founders
hoped would prevent somebody like Donald
Trump from coming into power.
>> So, what should we do? Give give me in
again in brief in brief brush brush in
brief brush strokes um the new
constitution that you think the United
States should have. So we could start
with the thing that I think most
Americans think about when they think
about the undercarriic nature of our
system. Uh a reform that most Americans
have supported for a long time which is
dealing with the electoral college.
There's a proposal on the table now
actually something that's being acted
upon across the country to move to a
national popular vote by interstate
compact um without needing a
constitutional amendment. I mean the
amendment process itself is one of the
things that needs amending. very very
hard, one of the hardest constitutions
in the world to make substantive changes
to ours. So, uh, if you get a number of
states totaling up to the 270 you need
to win a presidential election to say
we're actually going to throw our
electoral votes to the popular vote
winner, you functionally worked around
the electoral college. Um, that's one
thing. Um, I've advocated in the past
for adding new states to the Senate. Um,
I think that there is an ideological
imbalance now for all kinds of reasons
in who gets represented the most and and
most uh most reliably in that body. Um,
but that's not a permanent fix to the
Senate at all. It's actually taking
advantage of the equal
>> that would be most most likely Puerto
Rico and
>> most likely Puerto Rico, DC, the
territories. Um,
>> so so right. So an ideal Senate or would
there be a Senate at all?
>> Well, that's another question. That's
that's another question. I mean I I
think that's worth exploring a kind of
radical idea but um it's an argument
that you have to make on the basis of
getting people to understand not only
that the system is not democratic but
like what is the value of democracy
actually to begin with. So, one reason I
wanted to have this conversation is that
I think that the focus on Donald Trump
and the focus on some of the, you know,
very real radicalism of some of the
ideas on the table on the political
right right now has obscured a little
bit just how much radical enthusiasm for
structural change
>> there is on the left. Like in the Biden
administration, there were both a set of
sort of concrete legislative pushes for
things like, you know, a big a big new
voting rights bill, that kind of thing.
And then there were just a lot of
proposals. These run the gamut from, as
you've already mentioned, statehood for
DC and Puerto Rico to big, you know, big
changes to the Supreme Court were
proposed. And I think, you know, now
that the Supreme Court and Donald Trump
are not in open war with each other, I
think the left-wing critique of the
Supreme Court is going to come back
probably in in a big way. Um, and you
know, the filibuster, right, we haven't
even talked about the filibuster sort of
a very concrete way that the Senate
itself frustrates merely majoritarian
efforts and requires supermajoritarian
efforts. So I my expectation is that all
of these ideas are going to be part of
the political conversation on the left
and are going to be very influential in
the next Democratic administration. What
I can't quite figure out, right, is how
they fit into actual practical politics.
>> Yeah.
>> Right. And I'm just curious how you see
that. Like do you think that a
Democratic candidate for president in
2028 or beyond should be running on this
kind of narrative and saying look we
need a kind of you know if not a new
founding at least something something
along those lines where if we take power
we really are going to make big changes
to how the Senate works.
>> Well I can tell you what I I'd like to
see happen. I think it would be a
mistake to do what we did in the B
administration again, which is take
these reform
uh ideas in isolation
um and not connect them to again a kind
of real material politics that most
people come to politics to try to
adjudicate. If we're talking about the
Senate filibuster and it's it's purely a
matter of well, you know, uh this is how
how majoritarian the system is by
design. And we're not talking about no,
this is why we can't pass the health
care reforms that we think we need. This
is why we can't uh meet your material
needs, improve the economy to your
benefit. Um if it's merely an
abstraction, I think it's it's a waste
of time. If if you connect it to e
economic concerns, material concerns, I
think there's real potential there. Most
Americans have been told that this
system works all their lives from the
time they're in school by politicians on
both sides of the aisle. You know, most
up until Donald Trump who said, "No,
maybe we shouldn't uh what was it?
Revoke parts of the Constitution and
like dialed it back." You know, most
Americans
>> Everything is negotiable.
>> Everything is negotiable. Right.
Exactly. Um, most Americans, you know,
even to the extent that they might be
concerned or be troubled by Donald Trump
and are talking about our democracy have
a conception of the system that is we
currently live in a democracy and need
to protect and preserve it. You go out
to these no kings protests and what
people say is I'm really really upset
and I'm really really angry that Donald
Trump has violated the constitution.
Right? Um, people say that I think with
all the sincerity one can have. I think
they say it for for good reasons. I'm
not somebody who believes that the
Constitution is wholly bad. I like the
Bill of Rights quite a bit. I think that
we should have stable procedures um to
adjudicate how governance works. Even as
I'm advocating for a new system
eventually, um, but something about that
register has to change in order for us
to consider
reforms at the level and at the scale
that I'm I'm talking about. I think I'd
like to see people whether it's
candidates or activists go out there and
say what really makes me mad is that
Donald Trump is violating the principle
that we have a right fundamentally as
human beings to self-governance. Right?
Donald Trump is doing things that
abregate our freedom as individuals. But
isn't but but isn't that I think see
it's just an an outsider to you know to
these sort of interleft debates. I feel
like you were on the most solid ground a
minute ago where you were saying, "No,
the key is to link debates about
self-government to some powerful
economic issue." It seems to me if you
stand up and say Donald Trump is
violating people's right to
self-government,
no, I mean there are people who will
care about that, right? But but you have
to say and the concrete effect is this
public policy that you want cannot be
passed.
>> I would say beyond that. I think that
you say that because when you talk about
democracy in that level as a fundamental
human entitlement, you say I oppose
Donald Trump's authoritarianism and I
oppose that in the mas principle and I
also oppose our bosses, our executives,
our investors in the economy lording it
over us at work and in the wider uh
economic system. Right? You say that we
have a system that is undemocratic, a
society that is undemocratic, not just
because we have broken political
institutions, we have broken economic
institutions, and we should work towards
fulfilling the promise of American
democracy, not just by instituting these
political changes, but by really
reforming the economy so that we get
what we do or do from work, so that
we're more empowered, we have more
rights, right? And so if you're if you
were put in charge tomorrow of a new
Democratic administration strategy to
push something push some set of
proposals that you would think would
bring the Senate to a kind of crisis
point, right? Where it's like, you know,
you're going to use the filibuster.
These things aren't going to pass and
this will create the opening to at the
very least abolish the filibuster, if
not also to add new states. What do you
think are the most promising concrete
things that Democrats could be promising
there?
>> I think the first item of economic
legislation I'd put forward on the table
is the PROact. I think that again there
is a democratic character to arguments
for more worker power. Um
>> just for clarity sake, this is an act
that changes rules around unions and
unionization.
>> That's right. It it obiates state right
to work laws. It makes it easier to
organize. is it fights back against
worker um or rather employer efforts to
make unionization more difficult. Um
that is I think the central piece of
economic legislation and you make a
democratic argument for it. I think um
you say that we are now a party in the
Democratic party aptly named that is
going to fight for democracy in all of
its forms in in all the ways that we
can. That means resisting
authoritarianism
uh from the right. That means reforming
our political institutions. That means
granting each and every one of you as
workers what you're due uh in terms of
your voice and in terms of what you're
entitled to as a matter of pay at work.
Um that I think is a cohesive argument
rooted in again a conception of
democracy that is not just about casting
a ballot every 2 to 4 years. It's a
deeper conception of democracy that is
rooted in principles about
self-governance that links you up with
this whole both political and economic
agenda. Um, and I think a novel way and
I think it's a novel way for the left
specifically. I mean, we've invested a
lot of time, a lot of energy talking
about social democratic programs,
whether it's Medicare for all, Green New
Deal, this kind of thing. Um, labor
power, although everyone will tell you
it ought to be central to the agenda and
gen believe that it's it's not been as
central to the campaigns of someone like
Bernie Sanders or Doran Mani. Um
>> but partially that's just because
because the labor movement has declined
substantially and so few Americans are
in labor unions, right? So it it does
seem like you are
>> in a way you are raising your degree of
difficulty as opposed to like a debate
over Medicare for all, right? Because
with Medicare, all Americans or almost
all Americans expect to benefit from it.
Everyone has some contact with it. You
don't have to explain to people why
Medicare might be good for them. with
with labor politics, you do have to
explain to the vast majority of
Americans who aren't in unions, you have
to sell them on unions because they're
not invested already in this.
>> That's right. But I would actually flip
it. I mean, I think that one of the
reason why we don't have Medicare for
all, and it's been hard for us to do
social policy in general, social
democratic policy in general, people
actually perceive, well, you say this is
for me and for everyone, but you're
taking money out of my pocket to give it
to somebody else who I don't know, some
stranger who hasn't worked as hard as
me, right? That's been the fundamental,
I think, barrier to the success of
social democratic reform in this
country. Labor politics, uh, most
people, workers, uh, most adults anyway,
uh, people are usually not bosses,
usually not managers. And so even if
they're not in a union, I think you'd
make a case that they're entitled to
more authority, more voice, more agency
than they currently have. And that's the
case even if you're making no solid
amount of money. Well, even if you're
doing well now, what's actually
protecting your you from having your
employer lay you off, you know, tomorrow
or next week without your say or without
any kind of voice or any kind of ability
to to resist? Everybody, I think, who
works in this country has things that
they would complain about at work. Um,
and we need
>> not not just for the record, not me. I
love my job. It's it's fantastic. Just
just in case anyone is listening. Yeah.
>> Are quite zero complaints. Um, so it
actually flipped that. I mean, I think
that there's there's more of a kind of,
you know, cynically self-interestedness
within labor politics
>> than, you know, the the social
democratic politics that we've tried
where you're relying a lot upon the hope
that people are empathetic towards other
populations. I think that we can do
that, but historically we've been able
to do that on the basis of having a
strong labor infrastructure. Labor is
one of the key uh political um factions
or political uh power bases for
Democratic party as they build the New
Deal society, as they build the Great
Society, right? Um so maybe through
labor you can socialize people into
having a more capacious understanding of
American people they should care for.
Okay. But I then I then I want to with
this using this example then I want to
ask a question that takes us slightly
back towards theories of democracy,
right? Because suppose you know having
followed American politics through a
number of presidential cycles right I
can imagine a world where a democ a
democratic presidential candidate wins
an election wins 51 or 52% of the vote
right has a set of ideas maybe the
proact is one of them that pull
reasonably well during the election then
they come into power and they start
trying to pass legislation the
legislation gets critiqued in various
ways there are arguments about it voters
pay more attention to it and suddenly if
you look at the polls um the legislation
is un suddenly becomes unpopular, right?
And this is sort of one particular
example of what gets called the
thermostatic trend in public opinion
where uh you know ideas are popular and
then they're implemented and then the
public swings in the opposite direction.
Right. And I I want to know how that
fits into your theory of how democracy
should work because we've just lived
through 6 months where you know Donald
Trump, Steven Miller as his aid, right?
You know, have repeatedly come out and
said, "Look, we just won an election
with a majority of the vote. We
represent the will of the people, not
the Supreme Court, not the Senate, and
so on." Right? And there's a way in
which that's wrong because if you look
at public opinion polls, lots of Trump's
ideas are unpopular. But there is a
reasonable point there, right? It it
just seems to me that like when we talk
about the will of the people, we're
talking about something that is very
fickle and changeable that is different
6 months after an election than 6 months
before an election. Right? And part of
the case for like a convoluted
countermajoritarian system like the US
is that it's hard to really get at the
will of the people just through
elections alone.
>> So I mean I address this in the book by
saying I don't think the will of the
people is a real thing. Um it should be
intuitive that when you read polls and
you say majority of the American people
believe this on taxes and another
majority believes this on environmental
policy, majority believes this on
women's right to choose and so on. uh
these are not all the same group of
people. There's not one the majority
that's being represented across all of
those issues spaces. So the concept of
will of the people is very very troubled
theoretically.
>> And one of the reasons why I call my
book the right of the people is because
I think that that phrase better
encompasses what I think is actually
going on in democracy. In a democracy,
you have a stable set of procedures
where people have an equal chance to
kind of contest power and majorities are
the way that we adjudicate who wins a
particular contest. Right? If you're a
minority now, you might be majority in
the majority next time. Um that's a
dynamic process. There's no one point at
which we say we fully, transcendently,
spiritually, whatever you want to say,
have represented the will of the people
in this electoral process. We should
understand democracy as something more
contingent and fluid than that. Um, and
so I think that the concept of the will
of the people though is is it's misled
people I think who are well meaning, but
I think it's also been proven useful for
authoritarians, frankly speaking. So
Donald Trump or Elon Musk saying, "Well,
you know, whatever we say kind of goes
cuz we are embodying the true
unquestionable sense of the American
people."
>> Okay. But what are they embodying then?
you're leaning very hard on the idea
that, you know, they're they're
embodying the right of a contingent
provisional majority to choose its
leaders.
>> I think that's that's exactly what
happens in a democracy
>> and that's all.
>> Yeah. And I think that that it sounds
deflationary, right? But I think this is
this is one of the things that makes
democracy work and makes it again a a
useful means of governing ourselves with
certain advantages over rule of the few.
the fact that it's dynamic, things
change. Um, you make an argument today
and it doesn't work, you try a different
set of arguments tomorrow and it that
might work and that might pull in more
people. You have form different
coalitions. I think democracy has a
character to it um to produce, generate
change, process change that makes it one
of that's this is one of the reasons why
I think we should value it.
>> So I I agree that we should value it. I
think the deflationary argument though
does make me personally more comfortable
with the kind of tangled complex system
that we have right now which I
completely agree is not one that I think
a sensible person would design from
scratch. Um I think some elements of it
are more defensible than others. I
would, you know, probably mount a
stronger defense of some elements of the
Senate than I would of the electoral
college, though I might have a different
view tomorrow because like the public, I
I can change my views, right? But but I
guess like if you're not getting if
you're not getting the will of the
people,
>> then it seems like the case for revising
our entire system becomes a little
weaker.
>> No, I don't think so. Because I I don't
think what we're deflating is
necessarily democracy itself. We're
deflating the concept of the will of the
people. But democracy remains important
because again I think that through these
fair contests you allow people the
chance to have a voice and have a say in
their society and shaping the conditions
of their lives. Right? I think that's
still a transcendently important idea. I
think that's still a practically useful
idea and I think that we should be
troubled um when that isn't the case.
when somebody on the basis of a pure
accident of where they happen to live
has much much more say over the
conditions that shape their lives than
somebody else who happens to live
somewhere else in the country right but
you know I I think that we should be
open to the idea that yes we should have
a complex political system um yes we
shouldn't say well you know because x
number of people believe this in the
poll and we didn't get it that means
that you know we have a broken system I
I think that the thing that more
fundamentally matters to me is do each
and every one of us really have a
meaningful and equal say in shaping this
country um to the extent that we can as
voters, right? Apart from whatever
policy outcomes that you might desire
>> in substance,
>> but those things are linked, right? In
part because one of the ways that
>> like how do you tell if you know if
public opinion is uncertain, changeable
and so on, right? One of the ways that
you tell whether a certain set of people
have a say in the government has to be
whether at least some of their ideas are
are represented. Right? And so here
let's here here I want to make a more a
less abstract and more concrete question
or challenge to your argument. Right? I
think the story of the entire western
world over the last 50 or 60 years has
been that we have a upper class, an
elite class, um a managerial class,
whatever you want to call it, that is
broadly speaking to the left of the
general public on social issues. not
always and in every case and there's
obviously been a lot of change but
nonetheless the drama of a lot of
debates whether it's you know about uh
abortion when Roie Wade was handed down
or whether it's about immigration
debates especially in Western Europe
maybe more so than here has been a case
where you have social and cultural
conservatives trying to claim more power
through the political process and
feeling themselves defeated whether by
judges or bureaucrats or anti-democratic
systems, right? And I think Trump
himself is kind of a representative of
that discontent erupting into into the
process into the system and and changing
it. And so it it seems to me that on
those issues, a more democratic America
would have still moved left on a bunch
of these questions, right? you know,
would not have stayed stuck in 1955 or
anything like that, but would not look
at all like the kind of society that I
think most people on the left envision.
>> Well, look, I mean, you can go back to
Donald Trump again having won the
popular vote in November, right? Uh I'm
I'm not supporting democracy because I
think it is the means through which I
get everything I want as a progressive
tomorrow. Um and I think that if we had
a democratic system, everybody would
agree with me, all the woke issues I
believe in, right? Uh I believe in
democracy as a fundamental core value
for governing society. Uh like a first
order value. Um and that means that I'm
willing to accept the possibility of
losing an election or losing many
elections in the course of making the
arguments that I believe in for the
kinds of policies and the kind of social
attitudes that I want. So I think that
just means we have to do the work of
trying to convince people to agree with
us on those issues. And as you say, over
the course of the last 10 years, people
have actually moved left on some of
these issues um themselves within the
general electorate, especially after
Ferguson in 2014, right? So I I I fully
accept that we lose sometimes as
progressives and sometimes we win. And
that's that's
>> okay. I didn't you maybe you're
conceding more ground than I than I
expected. So let me let me go let me go
a little further here, right? and say,
"Okay, but then like
the just on just in in the case of Trump
of Trump himself, right?" Like to me,
watching the Trump experience
has given me slightly more faith,
for better or worse, in the potency of
democracy as a force in American life.
Because from my perspective, one of the
ways you can tell if a society is
fundamentally democratic is do ideas and
issues that have a lot of support but
are considered disreputable
among the great and good, the wise and
mighty have political power and
political representation.
So in that way, a lot of forms of
right-wing populism seem like tests for
democracy. Clearly, Donald Trump was
considered disreputable, not just by,
you know, left-wingers or any anything
like that, but by a large number of the
people who ran the Republican party when
he started running for president. And it
just seems to me that it's kind of it's
kind of proof that America is actually,
you know, a fairly democratic society,
that he could win anyway and govern
anyway. It's it's been a a lesson for me
about the perils and dangers of what the
public wants because Trumpism comes with
all kinds of perils and dangers. But
>> isn't that a isn't that in some way a
triumph of democracy? The entire Trump
experience.
>> There was something very odd reading
after 2016 these narratives about
populism in academia. This was all the
rage, you know, for about five or six
years there where they're like, you
know, Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump
are both sides of the same coin really.
We have this kind of burgeoning
anti-institutional attitude within the
public and that means that democracy is
kind of unstable and and something we
should distrust. Um they ignored the
fact and I think it remains worth
pointing out that most people did not
want Donald Trump to be president in
2016. He spent most of his time as
political figure unpopular, right? Um so
on that basic kind of level I don't know
that you can see him as a triumph. Now I
do think you pointed out something
important though which is um look if we
believe in democracy if we believe in
political equality um that means that we
accept that there are going to be people
within a political sphere within um our
system who have very very extreme views
who have views that we might not like.
That's something you have to accept if
you you can't be a fairweather friend of
the democratic principle if you want it
to work and if you want to defend it
from authoritarianism. You have to have
a real principled commitment to it
within certain bounds. I talk about in
the book how we need liberalism. We need
republican values. Um but I I'm not I'm
not troubled by the reality that there
are people in this country who I'm going
to disagree with. Uh this country is
going to remain substantially
conservative. Uh no matter how how well
I argue and how well people on the left
argue. I think that's just the reality
of life in a large and diverse country
and that's just something you have to
accept. Let's talk let's talk about
Sanders for a moment then because I I I
think that that
I do think that Sanders and Trump both
represented versions of what I'm
describing here where Sanders
represented a set of economic ideas
>> that elites, the great and good, you
know, whoever else had had sort of
disdained and regarded as antiquated and
anacronistic, right?
um ideas that were also quite popular.
And I I think clearly lots and lots of
people were very into what Sanders was
selling in ways that elites did not
expect and that had a destabilizing
effect. Um and that changed Democratic
Democratic politics. And I I do see I
think even in defeat Sanders is in a
similar way to Trump a kind of triumph
for a certain kind of spirit of
democracy on the left.
>> Yeah. I'm curious
where you think that tendency is going
because again in thinking about the
concrete side of this. I I look at that
sort of Sanders eruption and I feel like
it was perfectly calibrated to the
mid210s, right? This is a period of low
inflation.
>> It's a period of, you know, slow
economic growth coming out of the great
recession. A sense that we didn't spend
we weren't Keynesian enough, right? we
didn't spend enough money. Um, and it's
just a zone where there seem to be a lot
of room to spend a bunch of money
without raising a lot of taxes. Um, and
I feel like the left right now
is, you know, just in a much more
difficult position because of inflation,
because of the, you know, shifts in the
economy since then. Can you get that
magic back? like the case for economic
democracy,
is it weaker now in 2025 than it was in
2016?
>> I think it's stronger because if you
identify economic democracy with
empowering workers, I think one of the
nifty fiscal things about something like
the proactation,
[Music]
they cost zero dollars. You can do these
things by statute. It's not a huge new
social program. Yet you are, I think,
materially improving the lives of
ordinary Americans in all kinds of ways.
And you're building the political base
so that eventually when it's more
fiscally sustainable, more popular,
whatever happens to be, you then are in
a better position to argue for the
social democratic policies that Sanders
ran on in 2016. Um, that's the kind of
order of things that I think we ought to
take up. And I think one of the
benefits, too, is that it's novel
sounding to people. Um, talking about
worker rights, labor rights in
democratic terms is not something I
think people are mostly used to hearing
from us. Um, again, they hear about
social programs, they hear about
Medicare for all, but empowering you
democratically at work because you're
entitled to certain things as a matter
of basic principle. Different register,
I think. Um, and again, I think it's a
registered that has a lot of promise
partially because you can take, you
know, liberals for instance, who are
closer to the center, angry about Donald
Trump's authoritarianism, angry what
they see about going on in Washington,
fired up about democracy, you could get
them to say, look, there's another piece
of democracy, too, and we can join these
two things together. And so that the
people that Sanders had trouble with,
which I think were largely this
constituency within the Democratic
party, closer to the center, more kind
of MSNBC liberals. you know, to use one
of the pjoratives that we on the left, I
guess, habitually fall into using. Um,
if we can find a way of connecting our
agendas, I think that's really really
powerful and something that we haven't
really tried very much on the left and
it has a lot of potential when it comes
to, you know, what happens in 2028.
>> But a lot a lot of that a lot of that a
lot of that is probably then though tied
up with the question of how Americans
feel about corporate America, right? And
this is, you know, we had Lena Khan on
the show to talk about sort of antitrust
and democratic politics and so on,
right? But I think one of the clear
impediments
again in the last 25 years to this kind
of pivot, right, is that Americans have
not necessarily felt incredibly hostile
to big corporations, big companies, and
so on, right? Um and that you know
they're they end up in a position where
the left is saying we need more labor
power, we need more worker power and the
big companies are saying oh but if you
do this we won't be able to hire as many
people you know we'll you'll you know
people people will lose their jobs and
so on and those those arguments have I
think been more effective than some
people on the left want to think. I I'm
cur do you think we're in a more
anti-corporate moment in 2025 than we
were recently? I think I think we've
been in an anti-corporate moment for for
quite some time now. Um, that doesn't
mean that everybody, you know, was was
going to the polls last November because
they wanted Lena Khan to stay on. I
think it was strange for people that was
a very narrow segment.
>> Um, you know, I love what Lena Khan did,
but that was that was like a that was
that was a different level of politics.
It was it was something behind the
scenes. Um, but general animist towards
the wealthy, general animist towards
corporations, I think we see that in
polls. I think we see people supporting
in large numbers taxing the rich more.
Um, one of the appeals that Donald Trump
made, at least the first time he ran,
was he was going to take a step away
from, you know, corporate control of the
Republican party, right? He wins the
primary, I think, partially on his basis
to build a constituency like that. So, I
think there's a real potency to that
politics if we if we try it again.
Bernie Sanders remains, I think, among
the or if not the most popular
politicians in America. So, I think I
think there's potential there. But I
think you're also right that people
don't have a natural hostility to Amazon
in the way the people on the left want,
you know, or natural hostility to any of
these big tech firms we use every single
day. But I think that just means we need
to make the argument um that there is
something unjust about the way this
corporation is structured. So, you know,
I think that there's a lot of restive
understanding that inequality has gone
out of control. corporations do all
kinds of things they can't in our
politics and in society in general, but
I don't think it's been directed in the
way that I'm advocating for um by the
left. And I think there's still a lot of
promise promise there myself anyway.
>> Okay. Well, let's then let's end by
talking about the me that message and
messengers um because you mentioned
Yeah. Uh Bernie Sanders is still very
popular, fills arenas, you know, but no
one has come along on the left with that
the same kind of popularity, the same
kind of bond with large numbers of
voters. You obviously have figures like
Alexandria Casiocortez who sort of are
seen as potential heirs to Sanders, but
even she I think sort of speaks to a
somewhat narrower demographic. And and
this is where you know one one element
of democracy that we haven't talked
about is the kind of mystical
>> yes
>> right the um there's a religious
historian Molly Worerin who has a new
book out uh about charisma in American
life right that I've I've been reading
in recently and
charisma is I mean this is the element I
think that sort of in a way it's sort of
hard to defend as a democratic theorist
because it is so weird and hard to pin
down. Like why does you know why did
Donald Trump cruise through the
Republican primary in 2016? You can run
down 17 different issues, but in the end
charisma has something to do with it.
Why is Bernie Sanders so much more
popular than any other prominent
socialist politician and the answer has
something to do with his weird grumpy
mayor of Burlington, you know, charisma,
right? So what I mean the concrete
question I want to ask is about who you
like as a future leader of the
Democratic party. But before you answer
that question, could you say something
about the mystical side of democracy and
where and where it fits into your
vision?
>> I mean this is just speaking personally.
This is one of the things I actually
like about democracy a lot. I mean a
particular kind of conservative will
look at something like the British
monarchy and say there's a kind of
mystique to this this system and the
traditions involved. When Queen
Elizabeth died, there was a lot of this,
right? I remember writing at the time,
democracy is way cooler than that.
Democracy is way weirder and more
mysterious and more more mystical. You
know, this idea of people coming
together, you know, from from wherever
they happen to be in society to make a
collective choice. We all do this ritual
of elections. So that's that's way
cooler on like an aesthetic level to me.
>> Democracy in the American system. Yeah.
It generates
charismatic leaders and the
Constitutional monarchy tries to
separate charisma from power, right?
>> And democracy, you accept that there's
going to be some relationship.
>> But it's not just the charisma of a
politician. Charisma of you going out in
the streets as an activist, you
convincing your family and friends to do
a particular thing in an election, you
having debates uh with with your friend,
you know, your loved ones and your
community. I mean, that's charisma
exists
>> everywhere in the system. And I think
that's one of the things that makes it,
I think, spiritually powerful for me.
But your concrete question which I can't
answer
>> who has who has charis well and who and
who has who's going to save the left not
just in terms of policy proposals right
but like we've talked you know we've
we've mentioned just in passing right
Abraham Lincoln
>> but like who do you feel like is is
there who who attracts you
>> I attracted I can't say I can't say that
I know of anybody who is as of yet
making the kinds of arguments about
democracy on the left that I wish people
were making in the public sphere. I'm
waiting on that. All kinds of talent. I
like Zoron quite a bit. Cannot be
president for very stupid reasons. Um
this is sorry just again Zor this is
Zoran Mand Mandani the you know the
probable future mayor of New York City.
And I agree. I I mean, again, I I think
if you I think if you go down his list
of policy prescriptions,
>> even in a left-wing city, you would have
never imagined him getting elected. But
if you watch a 2-minute video of him,
you're like, "Oh, I can see why this guy
might get elected."
>> Right. Right. So, there's there's real
talent there. But here's here's here's
how I tend to think about the trajectory
of the left in general. There is not
some kind of natural majority of
leftists in the country waiting to be
awakened by the right policy proposal or
even the right charismatic candidate. I
think that we are a movement that needs
to build ourselves up by bringing more
people over to our side. People on the
left in the last decade or so um to a I
don't think we fully appreciate or say
out loud were shaped by the Obama
experience. you know, there's this comet
from nowhere who comes in, wins the
Democratic primary, and then things
change or or at least he's able to
capture the attention of the Democratic
party, capture this amount of power.
That was what was going on when I was
growing up and in getting into American
politics and so on. But I think I think
it's clear now um that all of that was a
transient moment to a large extent. I do
think there have been durable shifts
since 2014 on social issues. I think the
polls bear that out very very quickly uh
very very clearly. Um but obviously we
haven't won. Obviously Bernie didn't win
in 2020 or 2016. And so there's a kind
of what if we do moment. Um before
Madani,
you know, prevailed in the primary. From
my own personal experience and talking
to people, there was a lot of cynicism.
There was a lot of kind of hopelessness
and a lack of direction people had. Um,
and I think he's reinvigorated the left
in in a really really big way and
demonstrated that there is a still a
kind of window here for us even within
the Democratic party and evidently even
with the Democratic party in New York
City, the seat of financial capital in
the world. Um, if that is possible, if
he is the likely the next mayor of New
York and we'll see what happens if he
gets in and how governance actually
works. But if that is electorally
possible, I think people have been given
a new lease on on life here as a
movement. And I think where we go next
is going to be determined by the extent
to which we take seriously the task of
conversion. How do we actually rope in
more people who don't already agree with
us, who aren't already reading, you
know, jackabin or even the new republic,
right? Who are just sort of
>> even the new republic.
>> Even the new republic.
>> If you can win in New York, you can win
in New York. But what you need is a
Bernie Sanders type politician who wins
a purple state governorship. Um, and
when that happens, I will I will fully
believe that,
>> you know,
>> right,
>> the left-wing moment has has arrived,
>> right? We'll see. We'll see. But I
think, you know, my own perspective
selfishly, self-interestedly, is
democracy has to be part of the the
secret sauce here. Um, you know, if
you've never read capital, but you
believe that people have a right to
govern themselves,
>> which you've just described most
American voters, describe most American
voters. Exactly. Right. You know, what
is the thing that's going to actually
get you to accept the left's premises on
the lack of power people have in the
economy and the extent to which workers
should direct the economy? I think that
there is a democratic argument that is
easier for people to understand, to
perceive, to swallow, and to sort of put
in line with their existing politics.
And a place to start that experiment for
me is within the Democratic party and
utilizing this this animous and this
anger people have about the state of
democracy to push people um in our
direction on economics. I think there's
a real again real opportunity there
that's worth exploring. If I'm wrong
then I don't know. I don't know. I'm
humble enough to say that I don't really
know what we try beyond that. But I do
think you you've outlined the challenge,
right? It's it's you went to New York,
you went to New York. How do you reach
out to the great middle of the country,
most Americans, most voters? I think
that's something we still have to
demonstrate that we can do and it's it's
something we have to be creative about
>> and that the mystery of democracy may
yet reveal.
>> Exactly.
>> Oo, thank you so much for joining me.
It's a pleasure.
>> Thank you for having me.
[Music]